GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
In a Trump administration, all
immigration
laws will be enforced.
GWEN IFILL: Donald Trump
outlines tough immigration
proposals hours after returning
from a surprise
meeting with Mexico's president.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Thursday:
a deep dive into the politics of
trade this
presidential election, and where
Hillary Clinton
stands on America role's in the
global economy.
GWEN IFILL: And empty shelves
line Venezuela's
grocery stores, as desperate
crowds await
a rare meal -- a look at the
country's worsening
food shortage.
MAN (through translator): It's
one article
of food per person, and then you
have to wait
eight days, because, if you try
to buy more,
they will stop you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The campaign
spotlight stayed
on Donald Trump today, and what
he will or
will not do about immigration,
deportation,
and a border wall.
The Republican nominee faced
fallout from
a fiery speech last night hours
after he had
taken a more moderate tone with
Mexico's president.
We will have a full report after
the news
summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: People
along Florida's Gulf Coast
braced for a direct
hit tonight by a hurricane, the
state's first
since 2005.
Hermine is projected to make
landfall with
winds of 75 miles an hour or
higher and drive
across the state toward the
Atlantic.
As it approached today, rain
caused minor
flooding, and people filled
sandbags.
Governor Rick Scott warned
against taking
the storm for granted.
GOV.
RICK SCOTT (R), Florida: We're
going to see
a big storm surge.
We're going to see a lot of
rain.
We're going to see flooding.
We're going to see downed power
lines.
We're going to see -- there's
going to be
a lot of risk if we don't do our
job.
Everybody needs to be prepared.
We are blessed.
We have the best emergency
management teams
in the country at the state and
at the local
level.
We have a great National Guard,
but you have
got to take this seriously.
GWEN IFILL: Many cities in the
storm's path,
including the capital,
Tallahassee, have not
been hit by a hurricane in
decades.
HARI SREENIVASAN: State
lawmakers in California
are expanding a climate change
law that's
already the most aggressive in
the nation.
Majority Democrats agreed last
night to regulate
methane emissions from landfills
and dairy
farms for the first time.
It came over the objections of
industry and
farming interests.
GWEN IFILL: A huge explosion
rocked a SpaceX
launch pad today at Cape
Canaveral, Florida.
The unmanned Falcon rocket blew
up as a test
for a Saturday launch was under
way.
The blast also destroyed a
communications
satellite on board, but no one
was hurt.
SpaceX said there was a problem
in a fuel
tank, but they gave no details.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Eastern
Ukraine, a fragile
new cease-fire took effect at
midnight between
government troops and
pro-Russian rebels.
Both President Petro Poroshenko
and the rebels
said the truce appeared to be
holding.
Fighting had flared in the
contested Donetsk
region over the last month after
an earlier
cease-fire collapsed.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, authorities
in Florida have found Zika virus
in three
groups of mosquitoes in Miami
Beach.
It's the first time that's
happened in the
continental United States.
The insects were trapped in the
small area
that's seen active Zika
transmission.
Officials said today the finding
will help
them fight the virus.
DR.
CHRIS BRADEN, Centers for
Disease Control
and Prevention: If there are
positive traps,
we know when, we know where.
All right?
We can identify where this
transmission is
occurring.
Typically, what happens is that
transmission
occurs in mosquitoes in a
limited area.
And so we can intensify what we
do in those
areas.
We can do more active
surveillance, we can
do surveys, we can do more
active mosquito
control.
GWEN IFILL: The control efforts
could be complicated
by the hurricane coming ashore
tonight.
Its heavy rain will leave new
breeding pools
for mosquitoes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In economic
news: Major
automakers reported U.S. sales
slumped in
August, as a surge in business
begins to cool
after six years.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 18 points to
close at 18419.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 14
points, and the
S&P 500 added a fraction.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Donald Trump's
immigration speech in context;
both presidential
candidates make their appeals to
veterans;
where Clinton stands on
international trade;
and much more.
GWEN IFILL: The talk on the
campaign trail
today focused largely on one
issue, immigration,
and the new words from one
candidate, Donald
Trump.
Lisa Desjardins reports.
AUDIENCE: Build the wallo~!
Build the wallo~!
LISA DESJARDINS: The scene today
was Southwestern
Ohio.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Don't worry, we're going to
build that wall.
That wall will go up.
LISA DESJARDINS: But the big
applause lines
for Donald Trump were the same
as last night
in Phoenix: talk of a Mexican
border wall
and fighting illegal
immigration.
That speech was Trump's most
comprehensive
yet on his signature issue.
DONALD TRUMP: Let me tell you
about my plan.
LISA DESJARDINS: Tell, he did,
for an hour
and 15 minutes.
Much was familiar, but on the
topic of deportation,
something new.
DONALD TRUMP: I am going to
create a new special
deportation task force focused
on identifying
and removing quickly the most
dangerous criminal
illegal immigrants in America.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's an
important shift,
as, in this speech in Florida
last year, previously,
Trump pledged to deport every
undocumented
immigrant.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
take people that
are here illegally, and we're
going to move
them out.
Got to move them out.
LISA DESJARDINS: But last night,
the Republican
nominee said he would target
only some, those
who commit crimes and those who
overstay their
visa.
DONALD TRUMP: There are at least
two million
-- two million, think of it --
criminal aliens
now inside the country.
We will begin moving them out
day one.
LISA DESJARDINS: This leaves the
question
of what happens to everyone
else, millions
of others here illegally who
haven't committed
crimes since arriving.
Trump answered the question two
ways.
First, he said, those who stay
will remain
Outside the Law.
DONALD TRUMP: For those here
today illegally
who are seeking legal status,
they will have
one route and only one route: to
return home
and apply for reentry, like
everybody else.
LISA DESJARDINS: But later, near
the end of
the speech, Trump indicated that
someday that
could change.
DONALD TRUMP: In several years,
when we have
accomplished all of our
enforcement and deportation
goals and truly ended illegal
immigration
for good, including the
construction of a
great wall, then and only then
will we be
in a position to consider the
appropriate
disposition of those individuals
who remain.
That discussion can take place
only in an
atmosphere in which illegal
immigration is
a memory of the past.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump also
launched a plan
to limit all legal immigration,
proposing
a commission with these goals.
DONALD TRUMP: To keep
immigration levels,
measured by population share,
within historical
norms, to choose immigrants
based on merit,
merit, skill, and proficiency.
Doesn't that sound nice?
And to establish new immigration
controls
to boost wages and to ensure
that open jobs
are offered to American workers
first.
LISA DESJARDINS: The speech
brought repeated
thunderous applause in the
arena, but in the
aftermath, multiple members of
Trump's Hispanic
Advisory Council resigned from
that group.
Today, Democratic vice
presidential nominee
Tim Kaine slammed the speech as
anti-immigrant.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
It is a deportation nation, and
they're all
criminals, and they're doing
terrible things.
That is not going to make our
country great.
LISA DESJARDINS: Kaine also
charged that Trump
choked in yesterday's meeting
with Mexican
President Pena Nieto by not
repeating his
demand that Mexico pay for a
border wall.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: Digging deeper into
the politics
and policy of the immigration
debate, we turn
to Kris Kobach, the Kansas
secretary of state
who helped author Donald Trump's
immigration
policy, Marielena Hincapie, the
executive
director of the National
Immigration Law Center,
and Karthick Ramakrishnan,
associate dean
of the School of Public Policy
at the University
of California, Riverside.
He writes extensively on
immigration issues.
Professor Ramakrishnan, how did
immigration
end up being or at least appear
to be so central
to this political debate right
now?
KARTHICK RAMAKRISHNAN,
University of California,
Riverside: Well, it all started
with the launch
of Donald Trump's campaign.
It was a signature issue.
It was the thing that got him a
lot of attention,
some would say a lot of negative
attention
in the beginning, but he used
that publicity
and that notoriety to jump to
the top of the
Republican heap, and he has
never looked back
since.
GWEN IFILL: Marielena Hincapie,
how do you
interpret Donald Trump's
approach?
MARIELENA HINCAPIE, Executive
Director, National
Immigration Law Center: I think
Donald Trump
is a very smart man who knows
how to use the
media, and he's using
immigration as a wedge
issue.
He understands that there are
low-wage white
voters, for example, who are
feeling a lot
of economic distress and a lot
of economic
pain.
And rather than focusing on the
true issues,
which is that those workers
deserve a living
wage, collective bargaining,
safety net programs,
he instead is using their fear
of the other,
their fear of immigrants and
scapegoating
immigrants and fear-mongering in
order to
get elected.
GWEN IFILL: Kris Kobach, she
said a lot of
things there.
I want to start about the part
about who he
is speaking to.
Who is his audience?
KRIS KOBACH (R), Kansas
Secretary of State:
You know, I think he's speaking
to the American
people generally.
He's talking -- in his speech
last night,
he's talking about putting
American interests
first, putting Americans first,
whether we
talk about the resources of our
country or
whether we're talking about
crime.
And to the point that was just
made about
speaking to individuals who are
competing
with illegal labor for those
jobs and are
seeing wage depression in their
workplace,
illegal immigration, the impact
of it falls
disproportionately upon
African-American U.S.
citizens and Hispanic U.S.
citizens and legal
immigrants of Hispanic
ethnicity.
So, you know, really, he's
talking to -- in
terms of the wage depression
effect of illegal
immigration, he's talking to
individuals who
are often not white, and I think
this is part
of actually broadening the base,
and making
that point that you know your
wages have suffered
because of illegal immigration,
and I want
to do something about it.
GWEN IFILL: Professor
Ramakrishnan, how often
is an immigration debate about
economics and
how much is it, as Marielena
Hincapie was
saying, is about fear-mongering?
KARTHICK RAMAKRISHNAN: Well,
there's a little
of both.
Right?
And, in fact, it's important to
correct the
record that Kris Kobach just
laid out.
The National Academy of Sciences
in a consensus
report among social sciences --
it's very
difficult to get a consensus
among social
scientists -- found no evidence
-- this was
back in a report 20 years ago
and also a more
recent report from last year --
no evidence
that there is any significant
wage depression
effect.
More generally, when we talk
about America
being strong, it's important to
remember that
immigrants are Americans, too.
And, in fact, when you have seen
instances
like Riverside, New Jersey, for
example, which
passed a law trying to cut down
on undocumented
immigrants in the city, they
actually lost
economically.
You have cities and states
throughout the
country that are trying to get
immigrants,
including low-skilled
immigrants, because
they are so vital to sectors
like construction
and agriculture.
GWEN IFILL: I'm going to let
Kris Kobach respond
to that, and then I will get to
you, Marielena
Hincapie, in a moment.
KRIS KOBACH: The wage depression
effect has
been well-researched by
economists who have
looked specifically at it.
And I would note George Borjas
of Harvard
University has talked about it.
And, look, it's just
commonsense.
Anyone who is familiar with the
industries
of, like, meatpacking or hotel
janitorial
service knows that those wages
have gone down
not only in real terms, but in
absolute dollars,
because of illegal immigration.
And the point about the
economies of places
that crack down on illegal
immigration, look
at the states of Arizona and
Georgia, two
states that have cracked down on
illegal immigration
at the state level and have
E-Verify requirements
in place.
Their economies are booming.
So, clearly, pushing illegal
labor out of
the labor market doesn't mean
that a state's
economy collapses, and the same
is true for
the country.
GWEN IFILL: Marielena Hincapie,
let's talk
about one of the specific
proposals in Donald
Trump's speech last night where
he talked
about deportation.
Immediate -- he seemed to
suggest he was talking
about eventual deportation,
perhaps self-deportation,
which sounded very much like
something we
heard from Mitt Romney four
years ago.
How different is his deportation
plan, assuming
there are 11 million
undocumented immigrants
in this country?
How similar is it to what is
already in place
and what other Republican
candidates in the
past have proposed?
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: I think
there are a couple
of things to what Trump said
last night.
So, one is, he appeared to be --
at least
before the speech yesterday, he
appeared to
be trying to tone down the
rhetoric, but,
in fact, yesterday, he made very
clear that
although not everybody will --
all 11 million
will be deported on day one, he
did say that
within the first hour of his
first day of
the presidency, he would
immediately push
to have all individuals -- and I
think he
referred to the number two
million individuals
-- anyone who's been convicted
of crimes and
bad people, is the way he is
referring to
us as immigrants -- that they
would be deported.
And what that really means in
practice, Gwen,
one is, it's an extreme
position, and it's
an expensive position.
In order to deport and have a
deportation
force that would result in the
of 11 million immigrants, we're
talking about
over $6 billion -- or $60
billion.
One of the things in terms of
the current
policies that many people don't
understand
is, current administration,
Obama administration's
policy is to deport criminal --
individuals
with criminal convictions.
And, in fact, here in Los
Angeles, organizers
are fighting the deportation of
a grandmother
who was convicted of shoplifting
as a misdemeanor
over 30 years ago.
Is that really who Donald Trump
thinks are
bad people that should be
deported?
She's the grandmother of four
U.S. citizen
children.
She's raising, helping support
her family.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask Kris
Kobach about what
that happened today.
After his speech last night,
several of Donald
Trump's Hispanic Advisory
Council resigned
in disappointment.
They said they would no longer
support him.
A, why are they leaving, and are
they justified?
And, B, what was the point of
yesterday's
visit to Mexico in the end, when
there was
such disagreement about what was
said?
KRIS KOBACH: I can't comment on
the two individuals
you talked about.
I haven't seen any statement
from them or
explanation.
Or I'm really not familiar with
what they
have decided to do.
As far as the visit to Mexico,
you know, I
think that was really a pretty
shrewd move
by Mr. Trump.
He was given an invitation.
So was Hillary Clinton.
She declined it, at least for
the time being.
He took it and said, look, I'm
going to go
and I'm going to talk to the
president of
our neighbor, neighboring
country.
And, you know, they had an
interesting meeting,
by all accounts.
We don't know exactly what was
said, but one
of the interesting things I take
out of it
is, they came out of the meeting
and both
recognized that border security
is important.
And the Mexican president seemed
to be suggesting
that he, too, thought a wall was
justifiable.
So, you know, that's really
interesting.
Obviously, Mr. Trump is not the
president
yet.
And he was in no position to
argue.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: I'm not we listened
to exactly
the same press conference,
because I think
everybody agrees about border
security, Democrats,
Republicans, but I -- but we
don't have time
to debate all of that.
I do want to ask Professor
Ramakrishnan, what
is it about a zero-tolerance
argument that
seems so effective, or at least
keeps coming
back in our debates about
immigration?
KARTHICK RAMAKRISHNAN: Well,
it's important
to recognize, Gwen, that Donald
Trump's position
is actually a minority position,
not only
in the general electorate, which
he needs
to win, but even within the
Republican Party.
So, it's a bit surprising that
he doubled
down on the kind of rhetoric
that he did early
in the primary season.
This was a real opportunity for
him to potentially
pivot, right, and maybe not go
as far as many
of his advisers were thinking
about.
But he used the kind of
language.
And we know in our research on
framing -- we
have a book coming out on
framing, and as
it involves immigrants.
We know that frames like using
the word amnesty
or talking about the criminal
aspect, which
is actually -- all the evidence
shows immigrants
are much less likely to commit
crimes than
the native-born.
But using that kind of language
can fire up
the base.
Well, he needs to grow that
base.
And I'm not sure that he did
that last night.
GWEN IFILL: Professor Karthick
Ramakrishnan
and Kris Kobach and Marielena
Hincapie, thank
you all very much.
KARTHICK RAMAKRISHNAN: Thank
you, Gwen.
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: Thank you,
Gwen.
KRIS KOBACH: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Our analysis of
Donald Trump's
stance on immigration continues
online, where
Lisa Desjardins explores his
plan, and finds
six new key points from his
speech.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And now we
turn to another
voting bloc in the presidential
election,
veterans.
This week, the candidates who
are vying to
become the next commander in
chief courted
that vote.
Both Hillary Clinton and Donald
Trump briefly
paused their debate over
immigration this
week to address to the American
Legion.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
As the daughter of a veteran, as
a proud American,
I am grateful to you all.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The men and women of the
American Legion represent
the best, absolute best of
America, strength,
courage, selfless devotion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The candidates
voiced their
commitment to veterans and their
families,
and also took the chance to go
after each
other.
But what do the men and women
that served
in uniform think of their
options for president?
Bob Simpson is a Marine Corps
veteran who
served in Vietnam.
BOB SIMPSON, U.S. Marine Corps
Veteran: I
vote for Trump all the way.
It seems to be the general case
amongst all
of us veterans, not every one of
course, but
most of us probably pull to the
Trump side.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gene Miller, a
former Marine,
also served in Vietnam.
GENE MILLER, U.S. Marine Corps
Veteran: I
believe that Donald Trump is the
one that's
best suited over Hillary.
I believe that Mr. Trump has
several attributes
that is on record as far as
knowing the military.
He's up to speed on the
military.
He talks a tough game.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Two recent
polls found that
Trump holds a significant
advantage among
veterans, 14 percent in one poll
and 11 percent
in another.
But when asked who they feel
would be the
most supportive of veterans,
overall, likely
voters feel the candidates are
even.
Navy veteran Kia Hamel says
Clinton's support
is strongest with recent
veterans.
KIA THOMAS HAMEL, Veteran:
Younger veterans,
different ethnicities, females,
LGBT community
are coming out for Secretary
Clinton, because
she's more of a progressive
candidate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hamel one of
the first women
to serve on the aircraft carrier
the USS Nimitz,
supports Clinton.
KIA THOMAS HAMEL: She is not
going to be a
person that's going to be very
careless and
want to use nuclear weapons just
because she's
insulted.
And that's the kind of person
that we need
at the helm.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Both
candidates have stumbled
in dealing with veterans issues.
Last summer, Trump responded to
Senator John
McCain, calling his supporters
crazies.
DONALD TRUMP: He lost.
He let us down.
But, you know, he lost.
So I have never liked him as
much after that,
because I don't like losers.
But, Frank, let me get to it.
MAN: He's a war hero.
He's a war hero.
DONALD TRUMP: He's not a war
hero.
MAN: He's a war hero.
(CROSSTALK)
DONALD TRUMP: He's a war hero --
he's a war
hero because he was captured.
I like people that weren't
captured, OK, I
hate to tell you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And when the
father of a
Muslim American soldier who was
killed in
Iraq in 2004 condemned Trump's
rhetoric at
this year's Democratic
Convention, Trump attacked
the Goldman Sachs family on
television and
social media in the following
days.
Clinton upset some veterans
answering questions
last October about negligent
medical care
in certain VA hospitals.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Overall, veterans who do get
treated are satisfied
with their treatment.
WOMAN: More so than people in
the regular
system.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: That's
exactly right.
Now, nobody would believe that
from the coverage
that you see and the constant
berating of
the VA that comes from
Republicans, in part
in pursuit of this ideological
agenda.
WOMAN: But, in part, because
there has been
real scandal.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: There
has been, but
it's not been as widespread as
it has been
made out to be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Veterans like
Bob Simpson
and Gene Miller say they're also
concerned
about Clinton's response to the
attack on
the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi
and her use
of a private e-mail server while
secretary
of state.
BOB SIMPSON: If that had been
any one of us
with the computers, with
Benghazi, we'd have
been in the jail and they
would've thrown
the key away.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For Kia Hamel,
the biggest
concern about Donald Trump is
what she says
is a lack knowledge about world
affairs.
KIA THOMAS HAMEL: I think that
he's more of
a danger because of the fact
that he doesn't
know enough about the situations
to make an
educated decision.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm Hari Sreenivasan in
Washington.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
massive protest
sparked by Venezuela's growing
economic crisis;
Georgetown University sets out
to make amends
for its history of slavery; and
Lemony Snicket
explains how he got his pen
name.
But, first: If immigration is
one of this
year's big policy debates, the
other is free
trade.
And when it comes to the future
of how the
U.S. does business abroad, the
two major candidates
are not sounding that far apart.
Last week, correspondent Paul
Solman spoke
with economist Peter Navarro
about Donald
Trump's approach.
Tonight, Paul talks trade with
Ohio Senator
Sherrod Brown, one of Hillary
Clinton's biggest
supporters.
It's part of our Making Sense
series, which
airs every Thursday.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN (D), Ohio: Denise?
Denise.
PAUL SOLMAN: Sherrod Brown's
been buying suits
made in Brooklyn, Ohio, for
years.
The Democratic senator has long
pushed made
in America, long fought free
trade agreements
which, he says, have shafted
blue-collar workers.
MAN: Senator Brown is calling
for action against
cheating China.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: They don't play
fair, and we
have got to fight back.
PAUL SOLMAN: The message carried
him to reelection
four years ago in a state that's
bled some
300,000 manufacturing jobs in
the last 20
years.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont: We
have lost
millions of decent-paying jobs.
That has got to end.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: Left-wingers like
Bernie Sanders
have long shared Brown's stance
on trade.
But opposition to trade deals
has gone mainstream
in 2016.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We're letting our jobs go to
Mexico.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
As president, I will stand up to
China and
anyone else who tries to take
advantage of
American workers and companies.
PAUL SOLMAN: The big switch is
Clinton, long
associated with free trade
agreements.
Brown threw his support behind
her early on,
because, her insists, she now
gets it.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: She is someone
who understands
trade, who understands we want
more of it,
but we want it under a different
set of rules.
PAUL SOLMAN: Brown brought us to
the Keystone
suit plant in the Cleveland
suburbs to elaborate.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: What she wants to
do on enforcing
trade policy, she wants to
triple the number
of trade enforcement officers,
which will
really matter in trying to level
the playing
field fighting with South Korea
and China
and other countries that don't
play it straight.
She wants a special trade
prosecutor directed
specifically at China, where we
have by far
our largest bilateral trade
deficit.
We lost five million jobs from
2000 to 2010,
60,000 plants closed -- this one
almost closed
-- in large part because of
unfair trade practices.
PAUL SOLMAN: Two years ago, Hugo
Boss it would
close this factory.
But Brown helped facilitate its
sale to Keystone
Tailored Manufacturing.
The workers here have been
making Hart Schaffner
Marx suits ever since.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: You know, these
are not high-paying
jobs, but they're good union
jobs with good
union benefits.
PAUL SOLMAN: No surprise, then,
that the senior
senator is something of a hero
here.
Brown says he walks the walk on
trade, while
Donald Trump doesn't.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: I have a number
of suits that
were made in -- on this shop
floor.
Donald Trump outsources his
suits to Mexico.
He could have bought them here.
He could have had them made
here.
He outsourced -- outsources his
ties to China.
He outsources.
This tie's made in the U.S.
Donald Trump talks a good game
on trade, but
he's never lived it.
He's lined his pockets by
outsourcing jobs
to low-wage countries, and now
he's talking
about trade as if he actually
means it?
I have been engaged in this
fight for 25 years
against bad trade policy, I have
never seen
Donald Trump stand with us.
I have never even heard Donald
Trump's name
or voice while we're working
against bad trade
policy.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, you haven't
heard Hillary
Clinton's voice on this issue
either.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: I absolutely
trust Hillary
Clinton to stand strong on these
trade agreements.
When she was in the Senate, she
voted against
some, she voted for some.
PAUL SOLMAN: Clinton has taken
plenty of heat
for changing her mind about the
Trans-Pacific
Partnership.
As secretary of state, she said:
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: This TPP
sets the
gold standard in trade
agreements.
PAUL SOLMAN: But candidate
Clinton has reversed
course.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I will
stop any trade
deal that kills jobs or holds
down wages,
including the Trans-Pacific
Partnership.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I oppose
it now, I
will oppose it after the
election, and I will
oppose it as president.
PAUL SOLMAN: You understand why
people would
say she's absolutely done an
about-face on
this issue, right, and that she
might well
go back on the position she now
has if she
becomes president.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: Well, she
supported TPP in
the early days because she was
the -- she
worked for the president of the
United States
in his cabinet, and so did
everybody else
in the Cabinet support TPP.
As a candidate, she understands
it, and she
looks at TPP in a different way,
fixing rules
of origin, fixing currency
issues, fixing
investor-state dispute
settlement, which undermines
environmental and worker safety
standards.
PAUL SOLMAN: In nearby
Cleveland, at the former
site of
Premier Manufacturing, we met
economist Susan
Helper, a progressive Democrat
who also supports
Hillary Clinton.
So, when a plant like this
closes down, there's
substantial economic damage.
SUSAN HELPER, Economist: yes.
The people in the plant lose
their jobs.
People working in restaurants
nearby lose
their jobs.
Home values fall, et cetera.
PAUL SOLMAN: This steel wire
plant, which
moved most of its work to
Mexico, exemplifies
the migration of U.S.
manufacturing.
SUSAN HELPER: The decline of
unions and the
figuring out by management of
strategies to
avoid unions in the U.S., and
then a movement,
particularly after NAFTA was
signed, to Mexico,
and even lower wages there.
PAUL SOLMAN: The North American
Free Trade
Agreement was signed by Bill
Clinton in 1993.
But his wife has become a
critic, for good
reason, says Professor Helper.
SUSAN HELPER: I think that one
of the things
now, we have greater experience.
We can see what -- what's
happened as a result
of some of the trade agreements.
There's some very excellent work
that suggests
that workers who are displaced
by trade or
other reasons, but particularly
by trade,
don't easily find new jobs.
And particularly in the case of
a lost manufacturing
job, the new job that somebody
gets doesn't
equal their previous wage.
PAUL SOLMAN: But many economists
argue, robots,
not trade deals, are the real
job-robbers.
So, I asked Sherrod Brown, isn't
it technology
that's actually replacing jobs,
as opposed
to unfair trade?
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: Well, it's all of
the above.
It's unfair trade practices.
It's technology.
About five miles from my home is
a company
called ArcelorMittal.
That plant was the first plant
in world history
where close to one person hour
of labor produces
one ton of steel.
That's technology, that's
efficiency.
That's put some steelworkers out
of work because
they're so efficient.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: But unfair trade
practices
has also -- have also put a lot
of those workers
out of work.
PAUL SOLMAN: Moreover, Susan
Helper's research
suggests that technology can
actually add
jobs at ArcelorMittal or
anywhere else.
SUSAN HELPER: When your
productivity goes
up, your price falls, so more
people are going
to want to buy things made out
of steel.
We looked at manufacturing
industries over
the last couple of decades, and
found that
those industries that had the
greatest productivity
growth actually had the most job
gains.
PAUL SOLMAN: But why?
SUSAN HELPER: Because they found
new markets.
They were able to expand into
new markets
and find new uses for the
technology that
they had innovated.
PAUL SOLMAN: Even so, Sherrod
Brown believes
candidate Clinton's tougher
stance on trade
is a welcome one.
SEN.
SHERROD BROWN: I'm glad we are
most efficient
steel plant in the world less
than 10 miles
from here, but we have got a lot
of work to
do to make sure trade
enforcement is done
the way Secretary Clinton wants
it done.
And that -- that will ultimately
provide jobs.
It will save jobs.
It will help manufacturing
rebirth.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is economics
correspondent
Paul Solman in and around
Cleveland, Ohio.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Caracas,
today, hundreds
of thousands of Venezuelans
turned out to
protest against President
Nicolas Maduro's
government and called for an end
to his rule.
The country has been plagued by
a deepening
economic crisis, corruption,
crime, all of
which have contributed to a
worsening food
shortage.
Nathan Halverson of Reveal from
the Center
for Investigative Reporting
recently visited
Caracas,.
NATHAN HALVERSON: Well before
sunrise, hungry
Venezuelans are waiting outside
grocery stores
praying for food trucks to
arrive.
By mid-morning, with streets
crowded with
anxious faces, there is little
hope.
WOMAN (through translator):
There is only
butter and oil.
We need them to send us more
food.
QUESTION (through translator):
When did you
get here?
WOMAN (through translator): At
4:00 a.m.
MAN (through translator): I got
here at 8:00
p.m. last night.
As Venezuelans watch their
country crumble
and their desperation and hunger
spill into
the streets, their anger with
President Nicolas
Maduro and his party has become
explosive.
WOMAN (through translator): This
is what's
happening in Venezuela.
We're starving.
We're struggling, thanks to this
government.
It's the Maduro diet.
NATHAN HALVERSON: Police now
guard grocery
stores across the country,
holding back the
hungry and volatile mobs.
MAN (through translator): Why
are you taking
me out of line?
I was here early.
I also need food.
NATHAN HALVERSON: Some 90
percent of Venezuelans
now report that food has become
too expensive
to buy.
Hungry mobs are increasingly
rioting and looting
bakeries and food trucks.
This has forced everyday people
to try and
calm desperate crowds, like this
grocery store
manager.
MAN (through translator): We
don't produce
the food.
Everyone is waiting for
something to arrive.
If it doesn't arrive, we can't
create food
from nothing.
NATHAN HALVERSON: People are
losing hope that
the government-controlled system
will supply
key items.
And they blame the socialist
government for
the scarcity.
MAN (through translator): It's
one article
of food per person, and then you
have to wait
eight days, because if you try
to buy more,
they will stop you.
NATHAN HALVERSON: The result is
hunger, and
a country increasingly turning
against President
Nicolas Maduro.
PAULA GIRAUD, Journalist
(through translator):
My friends have lost weight, 15,
20, 25 pounds
even.
NATHAN HALVERSON: Paula Giraud
is a journalist
who writes a food blog about the
country's
rapidly worsening situation.
PAULA GIRAUD (through
translator): I'm afraid
there will be, although the
government doesn't
want to see it, and I don't want
to either,
a social explosion of immense
proportions.
NATHAN HALVERSON: Usually, her
only meal for
an entire day is one egg.
PAULA GIRAUD: Only one egg, no
more.
NATHAN HALVERSON: And she has to
share it
with her dog.
The impacts are widespread.
Schoolchildren are fainting from
hunger.
CHILD (through translator): In
my house, there
is no food.
NATHAN HALVERSON: School
principal Malkis
Mochado (ph) says some students
don't even
have the energy to attend.
WOMAN: When you were absent from
school, why
didn't you come?
CHILD (through translator):
Because I had
nothing to eat.
NATHAN HALVERSON: The school now
provides
what is sometimes the only meal
these children
eat.
Food has become political.
In August, the opposition party
started this
school lunch program, winning
the gratitude
of a hungry community.
But, for others, food still
remains hard to
find.
MAN (through translator): I have
a job, but
what's the point?
My salary is worth nothing.
Right now, you can't even get
rice or corn
flour.
For everything, you have to wait
in line.
NATHAN HALVERSON: After work,
men gather on
street corners to scavenge for
food, rather
than skip work to wait in line
all day.
These workers once shopped at
government-subsidized
grocery stores like this one
once, but now
the shelves here are completely
empty.
But for some well-connected
people, there
are still reliable sources of
food.
Government employees receive
privileged access
at this warehouse.
These are government workers and
their friends
carting off items that most
Venezuelans can
no longer afford or even find on
the shelves.
Paula Giraud said the government
is using
the food to control people, to
buy their support,
and was outraged by what we
filmed.
PAULA GIRAUD (through
translator): Every week
in the country, the hunger
increases.
The shortages increase and the
corruption
increases.
That's what millions and
millions of Venezuelans
are enduring.
NATHAN HALVERSON: For the
country, the societal
explosion that many fear seems
to be inching
closer every day.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Nathan Halverson
in Caracas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In recent
years, a number
of prestigious colleges and
universities have
had to acknowledge their past
ties and history
to slavery in the U.S.
Today, Georgetown University
became the latest
to say it will apologize for its
past and
take new steps.
More than 200 years ago, the
original Georgetown
College operated plantations in
Maryland that
worked with slave labor.
Then, in 1838, facing deep debt,
a pair of
priests who each served as
president of Georgetown
sold 272 people to help pay the
bills.
The slaves were sent to
plantations in Louisiana.
To help atone for its past, the
university
announced it would give a
special preference
in admissions to applicants who
are descendants
of Georgetown's slaves.
It's also renaming a building in
honor of
one of the slaves, erecting a
public memorial,
and creating an institute to
study slavery
and its legacy.
University president John
DeGioia spoke at
a news conference today.
JOHN DEGIOIA, President,
Georgetown University:
So many were surprised, even
shocked, by the
revelation of Jesuit
slaveholding and the
benefit we received from the
1830 sale.
As a community and as
individuals, we cannot
do our best work if we refuse to
take ownership
of such a critical part of our
history.
We must acknowledge it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For a closer
look at this,
I'm joined from New York by
Craig Steven Wilder.
He's a professor of American
history at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, and
author of "Ebony
and Ivy: Race, Slavery, and the
Troubled History
of America's Universities."
Mr. Wilder, put this in context
for us.
How crucial was this transaction
of people
to keep Georgetown alive?
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER,
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology: You know, in
1838, Georgetown
sold -- the president of
Georgetown helped
negotiate the sale of about 272
people to
Louisiana.
And from what we understand,
about 15 to 20
percent of the money, the
proceeds, actually
was used to pay down
Georgetown's debts.
And so I think it's actually
quite crucial
to the continued survival of the
university.
This is about the time that the
university
imposed tuition for the first
time.
And so it was helping to meet a
number of
financial needs.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about
your thoughts
on the university's actions
today?
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER: I thought
that the report
was thorough and quite
thoughtful, but the
real meaning of the report --
I'm cautiously
optimistic -- I think the real
meaning of
the report will get revealed
over the next
several years and decades, as we
see Georgetown
implement these promises.
And it will depend upon how
fully those get
institutionalized on the campus,
and so that
we can actually see them really
get achieved.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how --
today, there
was a clause in there about
admissions preference.
Explain that.
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER: Well, I
think what they're
doing is, they're looking at the
descendants
of the 272 people who were sold
in 1838, and
seeking to bring them to campus
and to give
them preferential admission to
Georgetown,
actually like a lot of
populations of students
do.
For instance, the children of
alumni often
get preferential treatment in
admissions.
And so this would extend that to
the children
of the people sold -- or the
descendants of
the people sold in 1838.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How does this
compare to
what other schools are doing
these days?
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER: That step
is actually
-- takes the response to slavery
further than
any other institution has gone.
The other actions inside the
report actually
are fairly similar to what other
institutions
have done, for instance, the
renaming of two
of the buildings on the
Georgetown campus,
the decision to create a
memorial to slavery
on the campus, and the decision
to establish
an institute for the study of
slavery.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
dangers is that
this almost creates a checklist
for a university
that says, OK, fine, I have got
a memorial,
check.
I'm going to do this, check.
But that long-lasting change
you're talking
about, that could take years to
get through
the student body and the entire
campus.
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER: And I think
that's the
key to this.
A report does not bring closure
to the story
of Georgetown's relationship to
slavery.
What will ultimately begin to, I
hope, heal
and repair the relationship
between Georgetown,
the Catholic Church and the
descendants of
the people sold in 1838 will be,
in fact,
Georgetown fulfilling these
commitments in
a really quite holistic way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And does this
blaze the
trail for other universities,
considering
that there are already some that
are tackling
this?
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER: I think it
does.
I think that what you will see
is, in fact,
a continued conversation about
the legacies
of slavery on our campuses, and
also the thing
that's actually has kept much of
this discussion
alive for the past several
years, student
activism on campus, which has,
in fact, been
the instrument for keeping this
conversation
alive.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, has
Georgetown taken
steps to try to track down the
descendants?
Because, when you think about
it, 272 people
from the 1800s, that actually
could be thousands
of people by now.
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER: Right.
And one of the sort of
remarkable things about
the Georgetown situation is that
the records
that the Jesuits kept of that
sale are actually
really quite complete.
And so, with the assistance --
actually, really,
in many ways, the alumni sort of
pushed this
conversation, members of the
alumni community
of Georgetown, and actually
helped to both
fund and encourage the process
of reaching
out and going out to Louisiana
and helping
to track the genealogies of the
families who
are related to those 272 slaves.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And we're
talking a lot
about Georgetown today and a few
other schools,
but, really, when you look up
and down the
Eastern Seaboard for hundreds of
years, all
of the early, early colleges
likely had some
of this in their past.
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER: Yes, every
college established
before the American Revolution
-- there are
nine colleges established before
the revolution
in the British colonies.
They're all, in fact,
established by slave
traders and slave owners.
After the American Revolution,
we established
17 colleges, one every year
until 1800.
Those colleges have close ties
to slavery
because they're founded with the
recovery
of the slave economy after the
war.
And in the decades before the
Civil War, it's
the rise of the cotton economy
that drives
the expansion of American higher
education.
And so the story of American
education, higher
education in particular, is the
story of American
slavery.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Craig Steven
Wilder, thanks so much.
CRAIG STEVEN WILDER: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Online, the
discussion of
race continues.
Milwaukee was rocked by riots
last month after
a young man was killed by
police.
We talked to community leaders
and city officials
about the city's history of
segregation and
what hope there is for future
generations.
GWEN IFILL: Now to another of
our Brief But
Spectacular interviews.
Tonight, we hear from Daniel
Handler, a name
you may only recognize if we
identify him
by his alias, Lemony Snicket.
DANIEL HANDLER, Author: When I
was researching
my first novel, "The Basic
Eight," I was calling
up right-wing religious
organization and political
groups in order to make fun of
them.
And I thought to myself, I
better not tell
her my real name.
I will be on their mailing list
forever.
So, she said, "What is your
name?"
So, I said, "Lemony Snicket."
And then there was a pause.
And I thought, out of all the
things you could
have said, that was the worst
one.
No one was going to believe
that.
And then the woman from the
right-wing organization
said, "Is that spelled how it
sounds?"
When I was 5 years old, someone
asked me what
I wanted to be when I grew up,
and I said
that I wanted to be an old man
who lived on
the top of a mountain giving
advice.
I don't remember it.
All I remember is wanting to be
a writer.
I would read on the bus.
I would miss the bus because I
was reading.
The first book that I bought
with my own money
was "The Blue Aspic" by Edward
Gorey.
In fact, when the first two
volumes of "A
Series of Unfortunate Events"
were ready to
be published, I sent them to
Edward Gorey
with a note saying how much I
admired his
work and how much I hoped that
he would forgive
what I had stolen from him.
Shortly after I sent it, he
died.
So, I like to think that I
killed him.
So much of children's literature
is about
enforced fun or enforced
morality.
Surely, you will be rewarded if
you behave
this way, or aren't you having a
wonderful
time reading about this?
And you never are.
And it never goes that way.
So, part of "A Series of
Unfortunate Events"
was an acknowledgment of the
bewildering state
of affair that is childhood.
QUESTION: Do you have a notebook
on you right
now?
DANIEL HANDLER: I do.
I do have a notebook on me right
now.
This is my notebook.
I think of things or I read
them, and then
I write them down in the
notebook.
I type it onto a document on my
computer,
tape them or paste on to index
cards.
And I move all the index cards
around.
I write it on a legal pad
longhand.
I type up the legal pad onto
another document.
It makes me look largely like a
serial killer.
When I work in public, people
clutch their
children tighter because they're
walking by
a man sipping an espresso moving
pasted index
cards around and writing on a
legal pad.
That man's not to be trusted.
QUESTION: You say, it's OK, I'm
writing a
children's book.
DANIEL HANDLER: Yes.
I say, don't worry.
I'm in narrative prose.
A writer's relationship with
rejection is
like that of a fish to water.
It's all that's there.
I think you should feel it and
feel utter
despair and then move on.
I was going to say something
about technology's
influence on reading, but then I
got a text,
and I just have to answer it.
Can I just -- I will be right
back.
It's a triumph of finding
specific things
and an utter failure of finding
something
that you didn't know you were
looking for.
I exist in a state of
bewilderment almost
all of the time.
Am I grasping at the hem of some
large idea
that is worth investigating?
And I mull this over all day
long, whether
this thing that I'm pulling is a
thread that
will lead me through the
labyrinth or just
a thread that will dismantle the
sweater.
My name is Daniel Handler, AKA
Lemony Snicket.
And this is my Brief But
Spectacular take
on a bewildering world.
GWEN IFILL: A state of
bewilderment.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: You can watch
additional installments
of Brief But Spectacular on our
Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And we will be
back shortly.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
Tomorrow, a return to Joplin,
Missouri, five
years following the devastating
tornado there.
Tomorrow, a return to Joplin,
Missouri, five
years following the devastating
tornado there.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm
Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with
Mark Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.